 [ Silence ]
 >> Hello. This talk, the Mirror Neuron Initiative will be a talk
 on what sentience is and on what can be done to protect it.
 What is sentience?
 Sentience means feeling, the capacity to feel.
 And not just to feel emotions, but the capacity to feel anything.
 Sensations such as warm or cold, loud or soft, bright or pale, green or blue,
 and even what it feels like to think, to understand, to mean this rather than that.
 Sensations are states that it feels like something to be in.
 States that it feels like something to be in.
 There are also states that it does not feel like anything to be in.
 A kettle of boiling water is in the state of boiling, but it doesn't feel like anything
 to be a kettle of water in the state of boiling.
 I should add that it also doesn't feel like anything to anyone to be that kettle of water boiling.
 A feeling requires a feeler.
 That, if you think about it, is the real meaning of Descartes' cogito ergo sum.
 I think, therefore, I am.
 Descartes was asking whether there's anything that we could be absolutely sure
 about beyond all possible doubt.
 Many things are probably true, but we can't be sure.
 Apples have so far always fallen down toward the earth from the tree rather than up into the sky,
 probably because of Newton's law of gravity.
 But scientific laws are only probably true, not certain.
 There always remains the possibility that the world we think we see
 and all the things we feel we see are otherwise or changing,
 or even that they're, we're just imagining them.
 So Descartes was asking whether there was anything at all that we could be certain
 about that was not just probable, that was not open to doubt.
 And after Descartes had set aside the truths of science and of ordinary daily life
 as all just being probabilities that you could not be sure about,
 he found that there was just one thing left that could not be doubted, and that was this.
 When I'm feeling something, say a toothache, maybe there's some other cause.
 Maybe it's not my teeth that are hurting, maybe it's referred pain from my jaw.
 Maybe I have no teeth.
 Maybe it's phantom tooth pain, or maybe it's just psychosomatic pain.
 Those are all open to doubt.
 But what I cannot doubt is that I'm feeling something when I'm feeling something.
 And that if what I'm feeling feels like a toothache, then it hurts, even if it's psychosomatic.
 Actually, all pain is psychosomatic in that it's a state of our brain,
 a state that it feels like something to be in, and its feeler is me.
 You can tell a patient that there's nothing wrong with their teeth,
 but you can't tell them that they're not feeling pain when they really are feeling pain.
 Or can you?
 How can you tell whether they really are feeling pain?
 There are scientific correlates of pain, but those too are just probabilities.
 Descartes Cogito points out that I can't doubt that I myself am feeling pain when I'm actually feeling pain.
 The feeler is the infallible authority.
 The feeler cannot be wrong on whether they're feeling something and on what that something feels like.
 Though the feeler is not necessarily an authority on what caused the feeling, only on what feels like the cause.
 But I can't feel your pain, so I can't be sure you're feeling pain, or feeling anything at all for that matter.
 This is what has come to be called the other mind's problem.
 Who else but me feels? Who else is a feeler?
 All it's meant by having a mind is having states that it feels like something to be in.
 In other words, being sentient.
 The first thing we should ask ourselves is whether we or science need Descartes certainty, Cartesian certainty.
 The answer is no, we don't need Cartesian certainty that Newton's law of gravitation is true and that apples will always fall down rather than up.
 It's enough that we have evidence that it's highly probable.
 So what about the other mind's problem?
 I think it's safe to say that when it comes to our fellow human beings, it would be absurd to insist on Cartesian certainty, Descartes certainty, that other humans feel as we do.
 It's not about whether they need to have exactly the same feelings we have about everything. It's just that it would be absurd to doubt that other people too feel that most of them see and hear, much as we do.
 As Shylock says to Salarnio in The Merchant of Venice, in a passage particularly relevant to the theme of this talk, I'll now quote that passage.
 "Hath not a Jew eyes, hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions, fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer, as a Christian is.
 If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh?
 If you poison us, do we not die?"
 That's the end of the quote.
 For most human beings, the Shoah, as well as Vladimir Putin's monstrous deprivations on Ukraine today, are moral abominations, because most of us do not doubt that other human beings feel. We don't invoke the other mind's problem to justify treating them as if they were incensioned, like a kettle of boiling water.
 So whose problem is the other mind's problem, really?
 It's not really the problem of theorists like Descartes, who only considered human beings and who concluded that with non-human species, we may do as we please, because they lack a soul.
 No, the other mind's problem is in fact not our problem.
 It's the problem of those other minds, of those other species. It's their problem if they really are sentient, yet we treat them as if they were not, because we're not sure, or we say we're not sure.
 The other mind's problem is really the eternal Treblinka of all other sentient species, since the beginning of the Anthropocene era, about 12,000 years ago, in which our own species has become all-powerful.
 I'll now quote Isaac Bashevis Singer. "What do they know, all these scholars, all these philosophers, all the leaders of the world, about such as you? They've convinced themselves that man, the worst transgressor of all the species, is the crown of creation.
 All other creatures were created merely to provide him with food, pelts, to be tormented, exterminated.
 In relation to them, all people are Nazis. For the animals, it is an eternal Treblinka."
 So there is Cartesian doubt, and there's reasonable doubt.
 About the sentience of other human beings, and about the sentience of most other mammals, birds, fish, other vertebrates, there's no longer any reasonable doubt. We all know they feel. The correlations and the similarities are too obvious to be ignored.
 And for more and more invertebrates, too, the evidence is getting stronger and stronger that they, too, feel.
 What does all that imply?
 Jonathan Birch has invoked the precautionary principle. According to the precautionary principle, the probability of sentience has to be weighted not only by the evidence that a species is sentient, but also by the severity of the consequences.
 The consequences of the consequences of our getting the wrong, the answer wrong, of concluding that they don't feel, when in reality they do.
 The consequences for whom?
 The consequences of our wrongly denying the sentience of a sentient species that is being harmed for human use, are as grave as consequences can possibly be for each individual member of that species who is hurt by us.
 According to the precautionary principle, in weighing the consequences of being right or wrong about other minds, there may be loss for humans. We may lose revenue and benefits from the exploitation of other species, and alternatives also have to be taken into account.
 Can the human benefits be gained by other means without using animals?
 Are the human benefits human necessities for human survival or health?
 Or are they just economic opportunities?
 The precautionary principle has been successfully used to change laws in the UK.
 But so much more needs to be done, not only to extend which species it covers, but to ensure that it's really preventing their suffering, not just formally claiming that they are capable of suffering. What can be done to help make that happen?
 A discovery that has received a lot of attention in neuroscience is mirror capacities, not just the fact that some other species, too, could recognize themselves in the mirror, although that is a mirror capacity, too.
 The reason for the attention is not that we have mirror capacities. We all know we had those already.
 We knew we could tell when someone else made the same movement we did. We knew that we could do that because we already knew we could imitate their gestures.
 We already knew we could imitate their vocalizations.
 So we know that there must be some way that our brains were able to match what others do with what we do.
 We knew also that we could sometimes perceive why others were making the movements they make. If you extend your arm, an infant will imitate you by extending its own arm.
 But if you extend your arm to reach an object that's a little beyond your reach, the infant will not copy you, but instead go and get the object and bring it to you.
 Your brain is doing some mind reading when it can match what you yourself do with what another person does.
 But this mind reading is even deeper when you can feel why they're doing it and you can match it by what they're trying to do by, excuse me, you can match it by doing what they're trying to do.
 We already know, we already knew we could perceive from other people's movements and voices and facial expressions that they were angry with us or happy to see us and yearning for a hug.
 We knew because we knew what it feels like to have that same feeling and our brains could match ourselves feeling it with seeing what it looks like when someone else feels it.
 Perhaps the most striking mirror capacity is hearing a sentence spoken to us, the way I'm speaking it to you, and understanding what it means.
 Because we know how to produce, the reason we understand is because we know how to produce that same sentence when that's what we mean.
 We know we had these mirror capacities and so we also knew our brains could produce them.
 But what was discovered by neuroscience and could be confirmed with non-invasive brain imaging on the surface of our heads
 was that for each of the mirror capacities I've mentioned, the area of the brain that is activated when we produce the action ourselves is the very same area that is activated when we perceive someone else producing the action.
 The mirror connection between producing and perceiving an action was what gave rise to the concept of mirror neurons.
 Although it was not always a single neuron that was involved but rather a sensory motor mirror region of the brain and it was a different mirror region for each perception production coupling.
 A different region for gesture limitation, for vocal imitation, for movement intention, for emotional expression, and for verbal meaning.
 Now something might already be occurring to some of you as I reach this point in my talk.
 Most people already know through their mind reading mirror capacities that not only other adult humans but human babies and family dogs and cats and other mammals and probably all vertebrates and many, perhaps all the invertebrates, once you get to know them, feel.
 But it's time to put these human mirror capacities, which by the way many non-human species have too, it is time to put these human mirror capacities to work.
 Perhaps the most important mirror capacity of all is empathy, knowing what it feels like to be hurt and perceiving it when others are hurt.
 The mirror capacity is not only behind compassion, it's also behind the golden rule itself, do unto others as you would have them do unto you.
 Mirror neurons and CCTV cameras.
 Since 2018 in the United Kingdom, it has become mandatory to install CCTV cameras in slaughterhouses.
 That's welcome and commendable, but it still leaves the problem of who will police the policeman.
 The CCTV data are simply recorded and archived by the meat industry and the archives are sampled now and then by the inspectors who certainly have neither the time nor the independence to see or do much.
 Other than report any infractions they happen to see.
 Infractions, however, that violate the unavoidably inadequate regulations, only the violations of the regulations.
 How is it ever possible to slaughter sentient animals humanely?
 Too. But the load can be taken off the far too few and far too conflicted inspectors in a simple way.
 By crowd sourcing the inspections.
 By live streaming the CCTV camera output online on the web for any citizen who wishes to report an infractions of the existing regulations.
 Those regulations can be prominently listed for citizen inspectors at the CCTV web streaming sites from which the crowd sourcing is done.
 And the live CCTV tapes can also be archived permanently online, accessible for continuing citizen inspection later too. All of that will help take the load off the animal activists too, who have to risk jail terms today in order to gather that same data.
 CCTV should also be mandated at all other sites where animals are being used for human ends, including breeding, rearing and transport.
 The citizen inspections for reporting infractions of the existing regulations are useful also for alerting and sensitizing the mirror neurons of citizen inspectors to that vast and for most people unexpected and shocking amount of suffering that is not forbidden by the existing regulations.
 This awakening will be particularly poignant to the inspectors of the live streams in real time, while the events are not yet a matter of past history but happening before your eyes.
 But there's another important function of the crowd sourced citizen inspections.
 Animal activists will no doubt be among those who do most of the inspection at first, and they already know all of this.
 But the general public is becoming increasingly sympathetic to the principle that we should not be causing unnecessary suffering to sentient beings.
 And they are increasingly supportive of the heroic efforts of the whistleblowing direct action activists.
 Crowd sourcing CCTV will allow everyone a legal way to help in the cause of exposing and punishing violations of existing regulations, but it will also alert their mirror neurons to how much agony goes on without violating any of the existing regulations, all the suffering that is permitted.
 The result of this exposure will be what is called cognitive dissonance, a clash between what we feel is wrong and what we're actually doing or supporting, a mismatch that our mirror neurons will make us feel.
 Crowd sourcing the inspections publicly will not be enough to make everyone abandon meat eating, despite what they've seen and felt, but being sensitized to what is really happening will make the public much more open to doing something more than just inspecting and reporting violations of existing regulations.
 The second component of the mirror neuron initiative is a graduated tax on all production, sales and purchase of animal products, coupled with a rebate for all production, sales and purchase of non animal alternatives.
 The cognitive dissonance of citizen inspectors, once their mirror neurons have been sensitized, will not be strong enough to inspire most people to become vegan, but it may prove strong enough to inspire enough people's mirror neurons to support
 gradually leveraging the entire animal husbandry industry towards the animal free alternative through the introduction of through the graduated tax on producing, selling and buying animal products, coupled with the rebate on producing, selling and buying non animal alternatives instead.
 There are many other reasons for supporting this systematic transition transformation, environmental reasons, human health reasons and economic reasons, but in this talk, I focused on the reasons that are visible in the mirror.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for listening.
 [BLANK_AUDIO]
